# Processing features of a programming language

There are a number of features of programming languages that you need to be familiar with. Much like being aware of nouns, verbs, adjectives, and how to use them when speaking English; you must be familiar with variables, control structures, and functions (and more) when programming in any language.

Contents:

1. [Variables](#variables)
1. [Instructions](#instructions)
1. [Control structures](#control-structures)
1. [Functions](#functions)
1. [Classes](#classes)
1. [Methods](#methods)

## Variables

Variables store data so that they can be retrieved later within a program.

The data that variables contain has both a **value**, and a **type**. In some programming languages, variables must be _declared_ with the type of data it will contain, but this is not necessary in Python.

### Variables in Python

To create variables in Python, we use the `=` operator. The variable name goes on the left of the operator, and the value being assigned goes on the right.

The data type is automatically assigned because Python is a _dynamically typed_ language.

It is important to note that certain [rules](https://www.w3schools.com/python/gloss_python_variable_names.asp) must be followed when naming variables in Python. For example, variable names cannot begin with a number.

## Instructions

An **instruction** is a unit of code that can be executed by a _compiler_ or _interpreter_. There are two types of instructions in programming:

* **Definitions:** instructions that assign values to variables
* **Statements:** instructions that perform a single action

Here are some examples of instructions in Python:

```python
# Definition: store a value in a variable
variable1 = 42
# Statement: recall the value of a variable and print it
print(variable1)

>>> 42
```

## Control structures

Control structures are instructions or groups of instructions that determine the order in which instructions are executed.

There are three fundamental control structures in programming:

* Sequences
* Conditions (selections, or if statements)
* Iterations (loops)

### Sequences

A **sequence** is a set of instructions that executes line by line, in the order they are written.

An example of a sequence in Python:

```python
name = input("Enter your name: ")
age = input("Enter your age: ")
print("Hello " + name + ", you are " + age + " years old.")
```

The above sequence executes three instructions. The first two lines are definitions that assign values based on user input, and the last instruction is a statement that prints out a message. _Each line of code is run in order and only once_.

### Conditionals

Sometimes programmers want their programs to behave differently when certain things happen. To do this, we use conditionals (also known as selections). Conditions are [boolean](./kk319.md#boolean) and if evaluated as _true_ their corresponding instructions will be executed. If _false_, the code will not be executed.

The following is an example of a conditional in Python, using [comparison](kk311#comparison) operators:

```python
if a == b:
    print("a and b are equal")

if a != b:
    print("a and b are not equal")
```

Conditional statements can also include an _alternative execution_. This means if the condition is false, instead of not executing the instructions, different instructions are executed instead.

The following example will return the same result as the previous example using an alternative execution:

```python
if a == b:
    print("a and b are equal")

else:
    print("a and b are not equal")
```

If you need more than two directions your code can go, you can use a _chained conditional_. Chained conditionals need to have their own logic at each possibility, and you can optionally add an `else` at the end to cover all other possibilities:

```python
if a > b:
    print("a is greater than b")

elif a < b:
    print("a is less than b")
    
else:
    print("a is equal to b")
```

### Iterations

🚧

### Functions

A _function_ is a number of instructions designed to perform a specific task that has been given a name by the programmer. The function executes an algorithm, and typically _returns_ a value or values. To use a function, it is _called_.

Python for example includes a number of built in functions that you have already used, such as `len()` and `print()`.

Functions require a _declaration_ that names the function and its arguments. It must also have a _definition_ written, which is simply the algorithm that the function performs. In Python, the declaration and the definition are done at the same time.

#### Arguments/parameters

Functions can include variables in their definitions. These are known as _arguments_ or _parameters_. These arguments are _passed_ to the function when it is called. Variables within functions are contained within the function, meaning they cannot be accessed outside of calling the function.

It is good practice to include relevant internal documentation that explains what the function does, and how to use it when necessary.

Here is a pseudocode example of a function with two arguments.

```
FUNCTION max(num1, num2)
    IF num1 > num2
        RETURN num1
    ELSE
        RETURN num2
```

Here is the same example in Python, along with some other code to show how functions behave.

```python
# Declaration and definition of a function
def max(num1, num2):
    """Return the maximum of two values""" # A 'docstring' that explains the function
    if num1 > num2:
        return num1 # Return this value
    else:
        return num2 # Or return this value

# Calling the function in a few different ways
a = max(7, 42)
print(max(7, 42))
b = 7; c = 42; d = max(b, c)

print(num1) # This will result in an error - num1 exists only inside the function

```

### Classes

A class is a feature of object-oriented programming, and can be thought of as a group of functions and variables. This group then acts as a template for creating objects.

For example, a programmer making a game could write an 'enemy' class that would contain some variables, such as the enemy's position on the screen, and some functions, such as the enemy's attack.

The programmer could also use this 'enemy' class as a template to create a new 'boss' class that has extra attacks. When a new class is based on an existing class, the new class _inherits_ the variables and methods from the base class.

```python
class Enemy:
    """Example class for an enemy in a game."""

    def __init__(self):
        """
        The '__init___' method is used in Python classes.
        It is run when the object is created.
        It is useful for setting starting values for the object.
        
        The 'self' variable refers to the object once created.
        For example, to use the objects position to run the attack method,
        you would use 'self.position'.
        You will almost always pass 'self' to methods.
        """
        self.position = [0, 0] # Start at the zero position in the game
        self.health = 100
        self.sprite = enemy_idle_image

    def attack(self, target):
        """
        This attack method deals damage to the target if they are in range.
        This is a melee attack that checks if the target is within 10 pixels
        of the object.
        """
        self.sprite = enemy_attack_image
        if abs(self.pos[0] - target.pos[0]) < 10 and abs(self.pos[1] - target.pos[1]) < 10:
            target.health -= 10 # subtract 10 health from target
```

### Methods

A _method_ is a function within a class.
