# Types of data structures

A _data structure_ is a method of organising data. Data structures allow operations or instructions to be performed efficiently on sets of data. They are more complex than data types.

Contents:

1. [Arrays](#arrays)
1. [One-dimensional arrays](#one-dimensional-arrays)
1. [Associative arrays](#associative-arrays)
1. [Records](#records)
1. [Other](#other)

## Arrays

An array is a data structure that contains groupings of data that are usually the same data type. Arrays (and other data structures) can also store other data structures within them (e.g. arrays of arrays).

For example, if I wanted to collect data on the height of my students, it would be much more efficient to store them in an array. Each height could be a floating point number stored within the structure. This would be much more efficient than storing each height in its own variable. I can then retrieve each value using its _index_.

| Index | Value |
| --- | --- |
| 0 | 1.6 |
| 1 | 1.7 |
| 2 | 1.6 |
| 3 | 1.5 |

Note that the first value has the index `0`. This is common to most programming languages (including Python) but sometimes they start at `1`.

This array would be implemented in Python using a _list_ like so:

```python
heights = [1.6, 1.7, 1.6, 1.5]

# Print out the 2nd value (index 1)

print(heights[1])

# Set a variable to the value of something in the array

jack_height = heights[2]

# Set the first value in the array to the value of a variable

jill_height = 1.4

heights[0] = jill_height

```

❗️ Note that Python does not actually have built-in arrays. We implement them using a _list_, which does some things that arrays do not do. They work fine as arrays though.

### Operations

The following operations can be performed on arrays:

* Add or append
* Remove or delete
* Lookup

(Of course, the values within an array or other data structure can have their own [operations](kk311.md#operations) performed as well)

❗️ Lists in Python have many more operations available than typical arrays. There are some really useful ones, so go learn about lists!

## One-dimensional arrays

Arrays can be two-dimensional (like matricies). However, in SofDev we only need to worry about one-dimensional arrays.

In order to create a two-dimensional array in Python, you would put lists inside of a list:

```python
array_2d = [ [11, 12, 13], [21, 22, 23], [31, 32, 33] ]

# You could lay out your array to look more readable
# The below structure is functionally the same as the above

array_2d = [
    [11, 12, 13],
    [21, 22, 23],
    [31, 32, 33]
    ]
```

## Associative arrays

An _associative array_ (commonly known as a _dictionary_) is much like a regular array except instead of a numerical index, _keys_ are used. Each entry in a dictionary is known as a _key-value pair_ (as they comprise a key and a corresponding value).

An associative array may be useful for the student height data if I wanted to recall which student was associated with a particular height (or which hieght was associated with a particular student).

| Key | Value |
| --- | --- |
| Bob | 1.6 |
| Mary | 1.7 |
| Jack | 1.6 |
| Sue | 1.5 |

```python
heights = {"Bob": 1.6, "Mary": 1.7, "Jack": 1.6, "Sue": 1.5}

# Print out Mary's height

print(heights["Mary"])
```

### Operations

Associative arrays typically allow the following operations:

* Add or append
* Remove or delete
* Modify or change
* Lookup

## Records

A _record_ is a data structure for collections of related elements that may not be the same data type. They are most typically found in databases, but can be used in programming as well (often they are referred to as _structs_).

A record consists of _fields_ that are usually fixed (i.e. they do not tend to change or get updated).

A record may be used to store more complete student details:

| id | first_name | last_name | year_level |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| BLO0001 | Billy | Blogs | 10 |

In object-oriented programming languages (e.g. Python) a record is essentially an object without object-oriented features.

_Files_ may also contain records and fields.

### Operations

There are no set operations for records in programming, but they some common operations for records might include:

* Assignment
* Comparison
* Add field
* Remove field

## Other

🚧 _Check back here for updates._

There are other data structures that have been previously covered in SofDev, but are no longer assessed. They may still be useful for you and your SAT project in particular. They are:

* Stacks
* Queues
* Linked lists
