# Naming conventions

A naming convention is a set of rules or guidelines used when creating variables, functions, classes, and other programming features. A useful naming convention will ensure that code elements are clearly labelled,  improving the efficiency of the programmer by reducing the amount of effort required to read and modify code. Programming languages also have some rules for naming elements that must be followed.

Contents:

1. [General tips](#general-tips)
1. [Common conventions](#common-conventions)
1. [Python style guide](#python-style-guide)

## General tips

Whichever naming convention you use, you should always try to create names that are:

1. descriptive
1. not be too long
1. easy to type

## Common conventions

### Camel case

Camel case, also known as camel caps of lowerCamelCase, is a convention that improves clarity of names with multiple words.

> `myVar`  
`firstName`  
`myVariableThatHasANameThatIsTooLong`

### Snake case

Snake case seperates words in names using underscores. This is the preferred style for Python programming. Many programmers agree that this is the easiest style to read.

> `my_var`  
`first_name`  
`my_variable_that_has_a_name_that_is_too_long`

### Hungarian notation

Hungarian notations is similar to camel case, but it adds a _prefix_ that identifies the data type or structure.

❗️ This naming convention is generally not as useful for dynamically typed languages such as Python.

| Variable name | Type |
| --- | --- |
| iNumEmployees | Integer |
| arrEmployees | Array |
| strEmployee | String |
| chEmployeeGender | Character |
| fpEmployeeHeight | Floating point |
| fnEmployeeFunction | Function |

Hungarian notation is flexible, and programmers may come up with their own prefixes.

## Python style guide

The [Python style guide](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/#naming-conventions) suggests using snake case for variables. Refer to the style guide for more details on the naming conventions that should be used for Python programming.
