# File formats

Files allow data to be recorded on a computing system storage device. Therefore, they are very important for software that needs to save information for later use, including 
your SAT project!

Contents:

1. [Binary files and text files](#binary-files-and-text-files)
1. [Plain text](#plain-text)
1. [Delimited](#delimited)
1. [XML](#xml)
1. [Examples in Python](#examples-in-python)
1. **[Practice tasks](#practice-tasks)**

## Binary files and text files

There are two main types of files to know: **binary files** and **text files**.

Binary files are:

* not easily readable, and
* harder to modify.

This gives them more security than text files. Examples of binary files include **software executables** (e.g. on Windows, files with a `.exe` extension), **documents** (e.g. PDFs and Microsoft Office documents), and **compressed data** (e.g. `7z`, `.zip`, and `.rar`).

Text files are:
* readable as text, and
* easier to modify.

This means you can open them with any text editor, and the data is structured and readable. Examples of text files include notes (e.g. `.txt`), configuration files (e.g. `.cfg`, `.ini`, and `.dotfiles`), HTML documents, and Python files.

❗️ _In SofDev, we must be familiar with the following specific text files: plain text, delimited, and XML._

## Plain text

_Plain text_ files are structured and contain characters of readable data. The data can be structured with spaces, new lines, and tabs.

Plain text files are commonly used for software and system configuration, and storing small amounts of data for programs.

While these files are "readable", they are not necessarily designed for human readability. Instead, they are often structured to be efficiently used by programs.

An example of a `.ini` text file:

```
[Filechooser Settings]
LocationMode=path-bar
ShowHidden=false
ShowSizeColumn=true
GeometryX=1540
GeometryY=269
GeometryWidth=888
GeometryHeight=594
SortColumn=name
SortOrder=ascending
StartupMode=recent
```

## Delimited

Text files can also contain data in rows and columns (i.e. a 2-dimensional array). This is done with _delimiter-separated value (DSV) file_, where each value is separated by a programmer-chosen character - a delimiter. Spaces, commas, and tabs are commonly used as delimiters in DSV files. When a comma is used, the file is known as a comma-separated values file (CSV).

An example of a very small `.csv` file:

```
first name,last name,year level
billy,blogs,11
harbajir,singh,12
minh,le,10
```

## XML

An XML, or eXtensible Markup Language file is created using a set of rules (similar to HTML) to create a human and computer-readable structre. XML allows data to be stored and transported within and between systems while maintaining its _integrity_, as its structure conforms to known standards and conventions.

XML files contain a **prolog**, which is information at the start of a the file that applies to the file as a whole, such as XML version and character encoding. After the prolog, is the **XML tree**, which is a set of elements. The tree begins with the **root element**, that is a **parent** to **child elements**. In other words, child elements are like sub-elements, and these sub-elements can have their own sub-elements and so on.

**XML file characteristics:**

| Element | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Root | The first element in the XML tree. There is only one root in an XML file. |
| Parent | Any element that contains sub-elements. |
| Child | A sub-element to another element. |
| Sibling | A sub-element on the same level as another. |
| Attribute | An attribute is a property of an element. |
| Text | The text content of an element. |

Elements and attributes are defined by the user, but some rules still apply. Elements are:

* case sensitive,
* must start with a letter or an underscore (like Python variables),
* cannot start with `xml`, and
* cannot contain spaces.

An example of an `.xml` file:

```
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="ISO8859-1" ?>
<CATALOG>
    <PLANT>
        <COMMON>Bloodroot</COMMON>
        <BOTANICAL>Sanguinaria canadensis</BOTANICAL>
        <ZONE>4</ZONE>
        <LIGHT>Mostly Shady</LIGHT>
        <PRICE>$2.44</PRICE>
        <AVAILABILITY>031599</AVAILABILITY>
    </PLANT>
    <PLANT>
        <COMMON>Columbine</COMMON>
        <BOTANICAL>Aquilegia canadensis</BOTANICAL>
        <ZONE>3</ZONE>
        <LIGHT>Mostly Shady</LIGHT>
        <PRICE>$9.37</PRICE>
        <AVAILABILITY>030699</AVAILABILITY>
    </PLANT>
</CATALOG>
```

## Examples in Python

For the following code examples, assume that the files reffered to exist in the same folder as the Python file.

You should test out these examples in Python.

```python
# Open a file in read mode
# 'f' is now a text file object
# It can be looped over like a list
# The following opens a file, prints it to the terminal, and closes it

f = open("settings.ini", "r")
for i in f:
    print(i)
f.close()

# Write a bunch of lines to a file

text = ["This is line 1", "This is line 2", "This is line 3"]
f = open("text.txt", "w")
for line in text:
    f.write(line)
f.close()
```

## Practice tasks

Complete the following tasks as practice and preparation.

❗️ Name the files from each task appropriately (e.g. "files-practice1", "files-practice2" and so on) and show them to your teacher.

1. Create or open a spreadsheet using Microsoft Excel, then save or export it as a CSV file.
2. Open a CSV file using a text editor and change or add some values, then see if it still works when you open it in Microsoft Excel.
3. Create an XML file that contains the data from the example XML file above (about plants).
4. Create an XML file that contains the data from the example CSV file above (about students).
5. Complete the [W3Schools tutorial](https://www.w3schools.com/python/python_file_handling.asp) on file handling in Python.
6. Write a Python program that reads a text file and prints each line in the terminal.
7. Write a Python program that reads a CSV file and prints the data in a pretty table.
8. Write a Python program that  
a. Opens or creates a file `hellofile.txt`,  
b. asks the user to input a string, and  
c. writes the string to the file.
9. Write a Python program that  
a. Opens or creates a file `students.csv`,  
b. asks the user to input the first and last names of students, and  
c. writes them to the file in CSV structure.

Challenges:

10. Write a Python program that reads XML files and stores the data in a dictionary (of dictionaries).
11. Write a Python program that reads XML files about plant catalogs, and allows you to add and edit plants.
