# Internal documentation

Internal documentation is an important aspect of writing good code. It is the notes and comments written by a programmer in the code itself. It includes information about the program as a whole, as well as about individual classes, functions, methods, and other elements.

Internal documentation has no impact on the speed or efficiency of the code, however it does improve the speed and efficiency of the programmer (especially if the programmer is working on someone elses code).

Contents:

1. [Conventions](#conventions)
1. [Examples](#examples)
1. [Python style guide](#python-style-guide)

## Conventions

Here are some common elements of internal documentation that should be included in your projects:

* a **header comment**

    This would contain the name of the file, a brief description of the program, the author's name, and the date of creation/modification.

* explanation of functions, classes, and methods

    This would include describing the behaviour, as well as the inputs and outputs

* single line comments providing brief descriptions of sections of code
* multi-line comments explaning a complex section of code
* descriptions of how to test aspects of the software
*1.* extra information on upgrades, changes, or enhancements made to the program.

Comments should also be well formatted:

* comments should be seperated from code by a blank line
* comments should be aligned with the indent level of the code

## Examples

In Python, comments are added using the hash or pound sign (`#`) before a comment.

❗️ The following example shows an example of _poorly commented Python code_. These comments are trivial as they do not add any extra information.

```python
def readFromCSV(csvFileName):

    # open the CSV file for reading
    csvFile = open(csvFileName, "r")

    # read all of the lines in the scv file
    csvContents = csvFile.readlines()
    return csvContents
```

Here is a better example:

```python
# Function: Reads a CSV file and returns its contents
# Input: String, filename
# Output: Array of strings, contents of the file
def readFromCSV(csvFileName):

    csvFile = open(csvFileName, "r")
    csvContents = csvFile.readlines()
    return csvContents
```


## Python style guide

See the [Python style guide](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/#comments) for suggestions on how to use internal documentation when using Python.
