# Validation

Imagine if you could prevent many potential errors from occuring in your programs. One way of doing this is to ensure that data used by your program is _reasonable_.

For example:

`age = -15`

Would be unreasonable, and is likely to cause runtime or logic errors.

It is usually simple to come up with rules to check if data is reasonable. In the case of `age`, the value should be a positive integer.

The process of checking whether data is reasonable or not is called _validation_.

There are three types of validation checks you need to know about in VCE SofDev.

Contents:

1. [Existence checks](#existence-checks)
1. [Range checks](#range-checks)
1. [Type checks](#type-checks)
1. [Validation in Python](#validation-in-python)

## Existence checks

An existence check simply checks whether a value has been entered at all. Existence checks are often used in online forms to ensure that you have entered an email address before submitting.

Example in Python:

```python
try:
    var
except NameError:
    var_exists = False
else:
    var_exists = True
```

Try the above code for yourself, then add a line at the start that assigns a value to `var` (you may want to print out the value of `var_exists` for both tries). What happens?

## Range checks

A range check ensures that a value is within acceptable limits, or comes from a list of acceptable values. The `age` example above is an example of a range check.

Examples in Python:

```python
if age < 0 or age > 120:
    print("That is not a reasonable value for an age.")
```

```python
if color not in colors_list:
    print("A valid colour was not entered.")
```
## Type checks

A type check checks whether a value entered is of the correct [data type](kk311.md). For our `age` example, we would want to make sure that a string had not been entered.

In Python, this can be a common problem when using the `input()` function to get user input. By default, all values entered by the user will be strings, and it is up to you to ensure that you convert them to the correct data type. Luckily, there are functions such as `int()` that allow you to convert (some) strings into integers.

Type checking is generally not necessary in Python, but you can use `int()` and `str()` to ensure that values are the correct type rather than checking them. You may need to throw an error message if the conversion fails, which would happen when trying to do `int("seven")` for example.

## Validation in Python

🚧