# Testing

When building a piece of software, it is important to check that it works and is as bug-free as possible. This means asking yourself the following questions:

* Does this module meet the required specifications?
* Does this module perform as expected?
* Is the module usable and efficient?

There are several techniques you need to know about to help you answer this question.

Contents:

1. [Errors and debugging](#errors-and-debugging)
1. [Construction of test data](#construction-of-test-data)
1. [Trace tables](#trace-tables)

## Errors and debugging

Errors can be classified as:

* [Syntax errors](#syntax-errors)
* [Runtime errors](#runtime-errors)
* [Logic/semantic errors](#logicsemantic-errors)

Different errors require different strategies to fix them. Knowing what type of error you are experiencing will help you in debugging it.

### Syntax errors

Programming languages have their own syntax rules, just like spoken languages have their own spelling and grammar. Syntax errors occur when the programmer writes code that does not follow the syntax rules.

Common causes of syntax errors:

* forgetting a colon
* missing a closing bracket
* spelling a keyword incorrectly

Some examples of syntax errors in Python:

```python
# Incorrect spelling of 'input' function
num1 = Input("Enter a number: ")
# Missing parentheses
num2 = input("Enter another number: "
# Missing colon (:)
if num1 == num2
# Missing quotes for string
    print(The variables are equal!)
```

#### How to debug syntax errors

These errors are usually found when the programmer tries to run their code, as the compiler or interpreter prevents the code from compiling or executing until the error is fixed. Most compilers or interpreters will indicate the line in the code that contains the error, which usually makes them easy to find and fix.

### Runtime errors

Unlike syntax errors, programs with runtime errors still compile and run. The error will only occur at some point during the program's operation. This usually means the program will crash or print an error message.

Common causes of runtime errors:

* memory leak (program uses more and more RAM
* divide-by-zero error
* opening a non-existent file

Runtime errors can be difficult to find because they may only occur when certain conditions are met. Therefore, it is important to test each section of your program thoroughly to ensure it functions robustly. Implementing [validation](kk3112.md) can also help prevent runtime errors from occuring.

#### How to debug runtime errors

🚧

### Logic/semantic errors

Logic or semantic errors happen when the code is syntactically correct, but the program's output is not expected. For example, if a function is written to calculate the square root of a number but it outputs the square of the number, this would be a logic error.

Common causes of runtime errors:

* Incorrect maths operations
* Referencing incorrect index of an [array](kk312.md#one-dimensional-arrays)

#### How to debug logic/semantic errors

Debugging logic errors can be difficult and time consuming, as the compiler or interpreter cannot help you find them. In order to closely analyse your code to find the error, you could use a [trace table](#trace-tables).

## Construction of test data

In order to _systematically_ test whether a module works, it is important to construct appopriate **test data** to write a **test case**. A test case is a set of steps to determine if the element tested works correctly:

1. selecting test data
1. writing test procedures
1. determining expected results

_At a minimum_, the selected test data must cover all input possibilities for the algorithm being tested.

There are four main types of test data:

1. data that tests valid and invalid inputs
1. data that tests [conditionals](kk319.md#conditionals)
1. data that tests [iterations](kk319.md#interations)
1. data that tests the user interface

### Bounday conditions

🚧

## Trace tables

Trace tables allow you to simulate the execution of your code, referred to as the **flow of execution**. Given test data, you can use a trace table to manually execute your code step by step, and identify exactly where the logic error occur so that they can be fixed.

🚧 Example of trace table coming soon.