# Sorting algorithms

The ability to sort data is important for many programs. This may be a direct requirement of the user, or it may be necessary for some other function that the program performs.

Sorting may seem easy for a human to perform manually, but to do so in a computer program requires some thought about the individual instructions required, and the control structures that handle decisions. It is also important for these steps to be chosen so as to be _efficient_. Sorting a large set of data could take a long time if the algorithm is poorly thought out.

In VCE Software Development, we need to know about two commonly used sorting algorithms: _selection sort_, and _quick sort_.

Contents:

1. [Selection sort](#selection-sort)
1. [Quick sort](#quick-sort)

## Selection sort

Selection sort simply explained works as follows: Starting at the first element in the list, it iterates through the rest of elements, keeps track of the smallest element, and swaps them if the smallest element is smaller than the first element. This process is then repeated starting at the second element, then the thrid, and so on.

Here is a more detailed description of the steps taken by selection sort:

1. Assume the first element is the smallest element.
1. Compare the first element to ever other element one-by-one.
1. If the current element is smaller than the first element, it is the new smallest element.
1. Continue to compare each element with the smallest element, updating which element is smallest if necessary.
1. Once the end is reached, swap the first element with the smallest element if one exists.
1. Repeat this process, starting with the second element in the list.
1. Repeat again, starting with the third element in the list.
1. Continue repeating this until all elements in the list have been checked.

❗️ Note: The steps as described in the Nelson textbook (page 47) are unclear at best, and wrong at worst. The examples and pseudocode however, are fine.

You can watch a [demonstration of selection sort](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g-PGLbMth_g) to aid your understanding of the above steps.

**To fully understand selection sort, you should aim to memorise the simple explanation, and use this to write the full algorithm in pseudocode.**

### Pseudocode

The following pseudocode is for your reference only. You should not try to memorise it; instead you should understand the concept of selection sort so that you could write the pseudocode yourself.

```
BEGIN SelectionSort(Array)
    n <-- amount of elements in Array
    FOR i <-- 1 to n-1
        smallest <-- i
        FOR j <-- i + 1 to n
            IF Array[j] < Array[smallest]
                smallest <-- j
        IF smallest != i
            SWAP Array[smallest], Array[i]
```

## Quick sort

🚧 Come back here for an update, but until then, take a look at the [Wikipedia page for quick sort](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binary_search_algorithm#Algorithm).
